Risk Management 2025 and beyond – 
priorities and transformation agenda 
for the banking industry
www.pwc.de
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  3Foreword
Dear readers,
On behalf of the PwC network, I am 
pleased to present the second edition 
of our global study on the future of Risk management. This follows the successful 2018 publication of our “Risk Mandate and Organisation” in which we 
surveyed leading international banks 
on the topic of the future of the Risk function. Throughout the entire industry, 
there was a consensus that extensive 
restructuring of the Risk function was necessary to deal with social shifts, state-of-the-art technologies and intense price pressure. Over the past 
three years, the financial industry 
has driven the strategic reorientation of its business and organisational models forward – with considerable 
variances in both their degree of 
maturity and progress attained. Framework conditions also changed fundamentally at the same time, while the list of challenges faced by the 
international finance sector remains 
endless – the COVID-19 pandemic, political instability, the shift in climate and societal values, regulations, low interest rates and digitalisation are 
increasingly putting the flexibility and 
resilience of banks to the test.
As part of our current “Risk 
Management 2025 and beyond  – 
Priorities and transformation agenda for the banking industry” global study, we conducted more than 80 interviews with senior Risk professionals 
concerning the main Risk management 
trends and subsequently drafted an in-depth transformation agenda for banks for the period up to 2025 and beyond. This study was reinforced by feedback from numerous banks regarding the “measurement” of the Risk function. A total of more than 1,500 data points provide gripping insight into the status 
quo, as well as prospects for Risk 
management. With unprecedented glimpses into the perspectives of leading banks and decision makers 
with regard to Risk management 
opportunities and potential, this study makes a substantial contribution to the discussion of how to overcome 
challenges. It is clear that the role of 
the Risk function and the Chief Risk Officer (CRO) is undergoing a period of dramatic transition.
First of all, CROs, Risk managers and 
their teams deserve much praise. Financial risks will always represent a cause for concern for banking, but banks worldwide are much better 
positioned today in terms of capital 
and liquidity. Risks have been greatly reduced, and the balance sheets and assets which do not represent the 
core business which were amassed in 
connection with the rapid growth over the last decade have been streamlined. Efficiency was increased further, for example through better capabilities 
at banks, in establishing counter-
cyclical buffers against credit losses anticipated for the future. The ongoing crises and most recently the pandemic have been well managed to a great 
extent. From our conversations, it 
has emerged that a holistic view is increasingly being applied to Risk management, under which in particular expectations for the first line of 
defense – “the business” – have risen.
4  Risk Management 2025 and beyondAn additional priority is perceived 
in Risk officers and their teams developing innovative approaches 
to react to both thematic and non-
financial risks. There is an increasing focus for the Risk function on cyber risks, fraud, money laundering, ESG and the growing dependence on a 
complex network of third, fourth and 
fifth parties. They necessitate new mindsets and courses of action, as well as a redirection for staff 
development and prioritisation and the 
required capabilities in the areas of Risk.
The lead finding is that Risk functions 
are becoming more dynamic and 
flexible and increasingly contribute to 
leading their banks through a complex 
and volatile landscape of opportunities and threats. In this context, this cross-departmental function will continue to 
gain importance within the meaning of 
integrated Risk management. Looking ahead rather than analysing the past will become the new mantra. This represents a fundamental shift for Risk 
management, which was traditionally 
rather quantitative and focused on the past. “Traditional” risk disciplines will be streamlined in years to come by means of digitalisation and reframed 
to respond to changing customer 
requirements. At the same time, the Risk profile is shifting to non-financial Risks, requiring new capabilities to be strengthened. We also perceive major 
advances in the use of technology, in 
particular with regard to analytics on demand and AI-based solutions to optimise risk management and boost 
effectiveness.
When these priorities are united, a 
clear image of the transformation agenda for the Risk management of the future emerges:•	Closer involvement/interlocking of the Risk function for strategy and decision-making processes
•	Improvement and dynamism of the (analytical) skill set for stress testing
•	Integration and digitalisation of non-financial Risks
•	Broad strengthening of operational 
resilience
•	Development of platforms to scale 
technologies, data and capabilities appropriately
This is reflected by the market: the next five years will continue to result in major changes to the Risk function (and Risk management in the broader 
sense). As part of our analysis, we 
have outlined the individual measures 
required to ensure the success of 
transforming the Risk function in the near term and which are customised to the size and business model.
I hope you enjoy perusing our study 
and look forward to your feedback. Please feel free to contact me directly.
Best Regards,
Dr. Sami Khiari
Partner at PwC Deutschland
sami.khiari@pwc.com
A Background and approach  .......................................... 6
1  Case for an agile and resilient Risk organisation ............ 7
B  Key observations and change priorities .................... 9
1 Interlocking of Risk and business transformation ......... 10
2  Moving from analogue to digital – unfinished 
business  concerning non-financial risks  ....................... 14
3  Preparing for climate change ........................................ 17
4  Building on the lessons from Covid-19 –  
never let a crisis go to waste ......................................... 20
5 Preparing for the decade of operational resilience .......23
6 Seizing upon the advent of true automation ................. 26
7 Managing the generational workforce transition ........... 29
Contacts  ............................................................................ 33Table of Contents
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  5
A  Background 
and approach
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  71   Case for an agile and resilient Risk organisation
The PwC 2018 Risk Mandate and 
Organisation Study highlighted the need for a radical transformation agenda as 
Risk functions looked to respond to 
increasing focus on non-financial risks and a growing need to optimise how Risk activities were being performed across the 3 lines of defence.
Over the last three years, the world 
has become a different place – and this was apparent even before Covid 
turned it upside down. The topic 
of climate change has transitioned into the mainstream and this will reshape society. The geopolitical landscape has become less stable with the balance shifting between West and East. In addition, banks 
are making major changes to their 
organisation and operating models, driven by pressure to perform and the opportunities provided by new 
technologies. While this is expected 
to result in cost reductions of material 
We spoke to 60 banks across different regions
North 
America  
11Europe  
18
Africa  
17APAC  
14significance, improved customer experience and enhanced analytics capabilities, in equal measure, it also 
introduces new risks and amplifies 
existing risks. In particular, this is increasing the need to think beyond the confines of the institution and raising the prominence of the external 
risks to which banks are exposed.
We spoke to more than 80 senior 
Risk professionals across a wide 
range  of global and regional banks 
to gain their perspectives on key 
priorities and on the ambitions that exist regarding transformation. Of the 60 banks, 25 participated in an optional standardised questionnaire. The charts in this report are based 
on the responses provided by 
participants. Notwithstanding differences in business mix, regulatory environment and operations, we noted 
a remarkable consensus on many of 
the key focus areas for the future.
8  Risk Management 2025 and beyondThe figure below provides an overview 
of what we see as the key priorities over the next five years and a related 
blueprint for change. The following 
Overview of the expected transformation agenda over the next five years
Embed Risk in 
strategy and 
decision making
•	Strengthen ERM 
team with focus on thematic risks, Risk digitisation and insights
•	Establish compe -
tence centers in line 1 and 2 for digital risks and resilience
•	Break existing silos and build holistic thinking across the lines of defense
•	Partner with business to digitise the bank and develop new value streams such as digital assets
•	Embed sustainability in strategy, business model and risk 
mgmt.Enhance stress 
testing and 
analytics 
capabilities
•	Build faster and 
more dynamic scenario analysis capabilities
•	Enhance ability to 
capture cross-risk 
type impacts
•	Develop agent- based and system dynamics-based tools
•	Develop structures and tools to identify 
and assess outlier 
eventsDigitisation of 
non-financial risk
•	Simplify policy requirements and focus on materiality
•	Define data models across non-financial 
risks and collect 
enriched data set
•	Redesign GRC platforms to work for the first line
•	Anchor non-financial risk management in 
value streams 
and transition to continuous assurance models
•	Build digital risk assistants supporting staff and increasing automationBuilding resilience 
into the 
organisation
•	Create common awareness and understanding
•	Rethinking risk appetite concepts 
and strengthen 
prominence in strategic decisions
•	Build visibility of value streams and points of failure 
•	Build capabilities to manage risks in the 
bank’s ecosystem
•	Rethink business 
continuity managementBuilding platforms 
to deploy 
technology at scale
•	Build a shared technology road map across the organisation
•	Revisit governance, 
budget and 
collaboration models
•	Strengthen demand management and focus on RoI
•	Treat data as an asset – prioritise 
frameworks and 
infrastructure
•	Build self-service data analysis capabilities
•	Invest in reskilling of staffChange priorities
Interlock 
between Risk 
and Business 
TransformationMoving from 
analog to 
digital – un  fi-
nished business 
around non-
financial risksPreparing for 
climate changePreparing for the 
decade of 
operational 
resilienceJoining into the 
advent of true 
automationManaging the 
generational 
workforce 
transitionsections provide further details on 
these topics, including a summary of emerging good practice across the 
industry.
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  9B  Key observations 
and change priorities
10  Risk Management 2025 and beyond1  Interlocking of Risk and business transformation
Bank business models continue to evolve driven by technology changes, new competitors and pressure on shareholder 
returns. Risk functions need to pivot their skills, capabilities and infrastructure to lock step with these changes to ensure a future proof and agile control environment. This also needs to be supplemented by strengthening interaction models and processes to support ongoing engagement with business lines and other functions which cuts across risk silos.Industry observationsMost banks see the need for Risk 
functions to adjust as traditional value 
streams are disrupted, forcing 
businesses to reposition themselves or 
find new sources of valueWhile efficiency continues to be 
important, material cost reduction 
is not on the agenda for the majority 
of Risk functionsWe also note some additional trends 
and threats did not come up as much 
as expected in our discussions which 
potentially highlights gaps/new 
considerations as part of risk 
identification
1.   Align cost and transformation goals across the end to end processes and capabilities rather than functional silos
2.   Further refine and evolve the 3 LoD model across different risk types and priority themes especially cyber, outsourcing, resilience and sustainability
3.   Strengthen and further build out the mandate and capabilities of the Enterprise Risk Management function
4.   Build focus and scale around risk controls, models and analyticsBlueprint for change
Industry observations
Most banks see the need for Risk 
functions to adjust as traditional value streams are disrupted 
and this forces businesses to 
reposition themselves or find new sources of value
When asked about the business areas 
expected to undergo the most change over the next decade, most institutions selected payments and transaction banking as their first choice, followed 
by retail and commercial lending as a 
close second. Risk function perspectives on business activities expected to undergo most 
change over the next decade
Weighted score based on ranking of activities
Payments and 
transaction 
bankingWholesale 
lendingRetail and 
commercial 
lendingGlobal 
marketsAsset 
servicingWealth 
management
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  11The key drivers included
•	Disintermediation:  technology and 
telecommunications companies 
as well as new competitors are 
expected to enter the market and 
decouple payments and transaction services from the banking sector. Furthermore, it is expected that there will be a transition to more open 
banking architecture and that the 
prominence of data aggregators will increase. This will have implications for bank-customer relationships 
and reduce exclusive access to 
behavioural data, which currently provides a competitive advantage.
•	Introduction of digital assets and crypto currencies:  digital assets 
are entering the mainstream and it is expected that central banks will launch their own digital currencies. In addition, some of the innovative companies working on distributed 
ledger technology will likely see their 
technologies be adopted by different industries. This will reshape business models around payments and settlements, disrupting established 
market participants but also providing 
new business opportunities.
•	Advances in infrastructure:  
many participants highlighted 
that payments and settlements 
are increasingly becoming faster and more convenient. In addition, emerging infrastructure such as decentralised exchanges are seen 
as emerging alternatives to services 
provided by a bank.While efficiency continues to 
be important, significant cost 
reductions are not on the agenda for the majority of Risk functions
When we conducted the study in 2018, 
the industry was feeling performance pressure due to the low-interest rate environment and high structural cost bases in many (but not all) institutions. Risk was looked at to contribute to significant cost savings, which were 
seen as difficult to achieve given the 
unrelenting nature of the regulatory change agenda and the challenges of legacy data and infrastructure.
Many institutions have since made and 
continue to make significant progress in automating end-to-end lending journeys, in particular in the retail and 
small and medium enterprises (SME) 
businesses. The approach here has been targeted such that it focuses on automating manual activities, such as data sourcing, cleansing and reporting, 
as well as stepping in earlier to weed 
out transactions unlikely to go through and identifying and communicating early with at-risk clients. The focus is not just on cost but also on a seamless 
customer experience, where there is 
an increasing use of apps with self-service functionality and the ability to position additional products and services of potential interest to the 
customer. While wholesale lending 
has not yet undergone the same level of transformation, participants 
spoke of opportunities to achieve 
significant efficiencies by leveraging new technologies. This includes, for example, the use of machine learning for the earlier identification of credit 
applications unlikely to be approved, 
which can bring about significant savings in the time spent on large and complex deals.
Looking forward, while some individual 
institutions continued to emphasise significant cost savings targets in excess of 25%, most referred to 
marginal reductions or even budget 
increases. However, there is a recognition of the need to be able to do more with less – and efficiency remains a top agenda item across the industry.
Cost reduction targets for the Risk function over the next five years
4
17
3
2
0
Budget 
increase0–10% 0 10–15% 15–25% >25%Number of institutions
Blueprint for change
1.   Align cost and transformation goals across end-to-
end processes and capabilities  
Siloed thinking and the difficulties of aligning interests 
across different parts of the institution continue to pose 
major challenges to the successful implementation of transformation agendas. The pandemic has shown that it is possible to do things differently and has demonstrated the speed at which it is possible to get things done if some 
“business as usual” barriers are removed. In particular, 
we see a need to revisit the way in which the budget and the overall change portfolio is managed and to review accountability structures and incentive mechanisms with 
a view to enforcing the need for collaboration.
2.   Further refine and evolve the 3 LoD model across 
different risk types and priority topics, especially cyber, outsourcing, resilience and sustainability  
While the fundamentals of the 3 LoD model are unquestioned, the question of how to get the best outcomes in managing thematic and non-financial risks came up in conversations in 2018 and remains relevant in our 2021 study. Key focus areas here include thinking 
about more fluid organisational structures or integrated 
“units” that straddle first and second line teams. There is also a need to adapt the 3 LoD model to ensure credible and efficient subject matter expertise and the right interaction model, especially in relation to new and 
emerging risks as well as the oversight of legal entities 
and smaller locations.
3.   Strengthen and further expand the mandate and capabilities of the enterprise risk management 
(ERM) function  
ERM has always had an overarching mandate and 
is increasingly being positioned as a function “that connects the dots”. There are opportunities to further expand capabilities, including developing central risk 
insight teams within ERM that focus on gaining insights 
and driving the tooling and data agenda of the Risk function. Further investment areas include better and faster scenario analysis capabilities as well as enhancing 
the top risks and emerging risks process.
4.   Increase focus and scale of risk controls, models 
and analytics  
A consistent objective across banks over the last ten years 
has been to increase scale by means of cross-functional 
utilities. While data and reporting have been an established utility that is shared across Risk and Finance functions for a number of years, other areas where such utilities are now beginning to emerge include modelling and analytics 
(centralising both risk and pricing modelling capabilities) 
as well as central control teams.Certain trends and threats did not come up as much as expected in our discussions and this potentially highlights gaps/new considerations 
for risk identification
While implicitly covered within digital 
risks, we see the risks of disinformation as one of the key challenges facing 
society – yet this was not a topic 
that was explicitly highlighted in any 
conversations.
A related priority that we believe will 
garner greater attention in coming years is how to ensure that data is trustworthy within a much more 
interconnected economy, especially 
as increasing volumes of near-time or real-time data become available.Similarly, the economy emerging 
around the Internet of things is likely 
to unlock new business opportunities and in turn compel risk/compliance functions to develop new capabilities. However, this was not an area 
which featured prominently in our 
conversations either and it did not score as highly as other technological innovations in the survey responses.
Risk function perspectives on the largest threats to the banking industry
Number of institutions
Climate change
Cyber threatsRegulation Impact of fintech
DisintemediationLoss of the customer 
relationship
Political instability Negative interest rates
12  Risk Management 2025 and beyond
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  13
14  Risk Management 2025 and beyond2   Moving from analogue to digital – unfinished business concerning  
non-financial risks
Most banks struggle to build a close link between performance of controls, specific process vulnerabilities and the loss 
estimates tagged to non-financial risks. There is equally a recognition of the need for new frameworks, assessment approaches and organisational structures around risk themes like cyber and climate change which can have very diverse impact channels. In addition, holding more capital is not necessarily seen as an effective mitigant against many of the non-financial risks with a need for a stronger focus on resilience and contingency actions.Industry observationsThere are significant 
differences in organisation 
maturity and ambition 
around non-financial risksThe interaction model 
between risk and 
compliance needs further 
thought and analysis and 
remains a complex area for 
most banks in the context of 
managing non-financial risksFirst line/line 1.5 control 
teams have grown 
exponentially over the past 
decade, often exceeding 
second line teams in sizeFirming up risk metrics and 
making sure that the board 
has risk-accepted any areas 
outside of appetite are 
current priorities shared by 
many firms
1.   Restructure non-financial risk policies and procedures to drive effective embedding
2.  Define KRIs that are forward-looking and enable an understanding of what drives the aggregate risk profile
3.   Replace/augment traditional GRC systems with tools that support flexible changes to controls and a native ability to monitor  effectiveness
4.   Develop “smart” technology to assist staff and take automation to the next levelBlueprint for change
Industry observations
There are significant differences in 
organisation maturity and ambition with regard to non-financial risks
Many institutions have ongoing 
programmes to transform their approach to non-financial risks and 
there has been mixed success and 
progress. The question is often where to start and the challenge is seen as growing exponentially with the size of the institution. The key challenges 
observed include the following:
•	Frameworks and methodologies are not aligned, leading to overlaps and inconsistent practices in the first and 
second line. This results in different areas within the institution developing 
their own tools and practices.
•	There is a lack of consensus about how and what to measure. While extensive sets of risk indicators and 
controls exist, these have often been 
based on what is available rather than what should be looked at.
•	Poor data quality and availability often limit abilities to perform even 
simple analytics. Routine data 
captured as part of processes such as incident reporting and RCSAs is of mixed quality and granularity and such processes generally do 
not take advantage of the growing 
volumes of data being generated by, for example, operational systems and processes.•	There is also a recognition that Risk functions have spent the past decade dealing with incoming regulations while simultaneously facing the burden of large-scale remediation 
programmes in multiple jurisdictions. 
There has often been insufficient time to step back and think strategically about how to build scalable solutions within a broader uniform framework 
so as to provide consistent definitions 
and ensure that methodologies are embedded in systems. Key examples here include large, poorly maintained control libraries and 
burdensome anti-money laundering 
(AML) practices caused by clunky and non-scalable architecture as well as  manual processes.
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  15The interaction model between Risk 
and Compliance functions requires further thought and analysis and 
remains a complex area for most 
banks when managing non-financial risks
While there is consensus on the benefit 
of (and need for) alignment between the 
Risk and Compliance functions in areas such as definitions, methodologies, lifecycle processes and systems, substantial challenges are faced in bringing this about. In practice, we continue to see varying organisational 
models.
In the case of about half of the 
participants in our study, the Compliance function reports to the CRO, which is in line with the philosophy that the CRO is ultimately 
accountable for establishing 
effective risk management practices and a corresponding culture for all risks. In other institutions, the 
Risk and Compliance functions are 
organisationally separate and there are not consistently plans to integrate them in the near future. We also note that while some institutions in territories 
like Australia have successfully 
operated integrated Operational Risk and Compliance functions for some time, recent integration attempts by some European institutions have not 
delivered the expected benefits.
First line/line 1.5 control teams have 
grown exponentially over the past decade, often exceeding second 
line teams in size
In 2018, many institutions spoke 
about redrawing the boundaries of the 
first and second lines of defence as part of their efficiency initiatives. The execution of these plans has resulted in the transfer of sizable numbers 
of individuals in some institutions. 
Although this has brought about a “cleaner” second line, it has shifted rather than structurally reduced the cost base. Apart from this, there were other institutions that expressed unease about any wholesale transfer of activities that could impact the stature 
of the Risk function in its review and 
challenge capacity. There was also concern that some areas of the bank lacked maturity and that, considering the potential implications of something 
going wrong, a practical decision 
to keep these activities – at least temporarily – within the second line might be a more appropriate option.
Current priorities shared by many 
firms include firming up risk metrics and making sure that the management board has approved 
risks from any areas outside of 
risk appetiteWhile a large number of key risk indicators (KRIs) and controls were in place, there was a strong impression that many of these were designed 
based on what is readily available 
rather than what should actually be measured.
Nonetheless, many participants 
spoke about a significant effort being 
made to identify and calibrate the correct indicators. The challenge becomes more pronounced in the case of topics like environmental, 
social and governance matters 
(ESG), cybersecurity and third-party risk, which require a much better understanding of what the key 
potential vulnerabilities both within 
and outside the institution are. Number of indicators included in non-financial risk appetite
<10 20–50 10–20 50–100 >100346
4
2Number of institutions per indicator bucketDoes the Compliance function report into the CRO?
Yes  
13 (57%)No 
10 (43%)Number of institutions
Blueprint for change
1.   Restructure non-financial risk policies and 
procedures to drive effective embedding across the organisation  
Risk and Compliance requirements are extensive and complex and are continuously evolving. For the first line, this presents a challenge in fully understanding and embedding the requirements, especially in the case of layered requirements arising from various policies. 
For example, a few institutions highlighted that deep 
reviews of the checklists and questionnaires required to be completed as part of the onboarding of third parties resulted in a significant reduction in the number of 
questions and a much faster onboarding process.
2.   Define KRIs that are forward-looking and 
facilitate an understanding of what drives the aggregate risk profile  
While non-financial risk practices are still relatively nascent compared to financial risks, we have noticed an increasing maturity in the design principles for approaching this topic in a structured manner (as compared to the 2018 study). The need for operational resilience is driving much 
more in-depth assessments of points of failure across 
organisations and KRIs are being adjusted to focus on what is identified as critical. Greater emphasis is being placed on looking at the same data as decision makers in the first line and – instead of merely monitoring outcomes 
after the fact – overseeing the decision-making process 
itself. Data is seen as foundational to the development of more targeted and “predictive” capabilities with significant efforts being made to define the correct data points and 
to make these accessible in a high-quality format within 
a single environment. For example, some banks have trained algorithms that are capable of singling out potential 
incidents and areas of focus and are informed by day-
specific market and operational data.
3.   Replace/augment traditional Governance, Risk and Control (GRC) systems with tools that support 
flexible changes to controls and a native ability to 
monitor effectiveness  
GRC systems and the processes built around them have generally been designed with the requirements of second line risk managers in mind. Individual institutions 
have redesigned the tools to work for the first line and 
have simplified requirements and user interfaces. To this end, institutions have opted for either reconfigured vendor solutions or in-house platforms. The benefits of 
this include a significant increase in first line maturity, 
greater proactivity in identifying risks and issues as well as a substantial reduction in costs.
4.   Develop “smart” technology to assist staff and take 
automation to the next level 
AI and machine learning provide the basis for reimagining the possible and the 2021 survey highlighted several examples of this. Many institutions have put more sophisticated tools in place for AML and fraud risks and 
have also deployed FAQ-style platforms as a self-service 
tool for staff prior to engaging expensive subject matter experts. At least one bank has gone further and developed digital risk assistants capable of advising employees on specific tasks. This includes formulating questions/
checklists for activities such as onboarding third parties, 
filtering out data and analytics that would be helpful for this task and automating risk and control assessments.
16  Risk Management 2025 and beyond
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  17Eating an elephant is how one of the banks described climate change. The enormity and uncertainty surrounding 
evolution of the climate agenda makes it particularly challenging for Risk functions. While the associated events could take decades to unfold, market responses to specific trends and crystallisation of key events could be much quicker. There is a need to establish effective frameworks and operating models to track and act on diverse data sources both for better risk management as well as a potential competitive advantage.
1.   Embed sustainability in the enterprise risk management framework and risk appetite
2.  Augment tools and capabilities to identify and assess physical and transition risks as part of risk identification
3.   Extend stress testing and scenario analysis capabilities to incorporate climate scenarios and related analysis and reporting  requirementsBlueprint for change Industry observationsSustainability was 
mentioned in passing 
during our 2018 
survey. Three years 
on, the world has 
changed as the 
generational challenge 
of climate change has 
transitioned into the 
mainstreamClimate change and 
more broadly 
sustainability as a 
theme present a 
range of significant 
challenges to 
financial servicesWhile the TCFD 
report issued in 2017 
provided a framework 
on how to look at 
transition and 
physical risks and 
frame disclosure, 
regulation is only 
gradually emergingWhile it is clear that 
firms will need to build 
capabilities to shape 
up an informed 
strategy and build 
effective and comp li-
ant risk manage  ment 
practices, the 
transition is expected 
to unfold in an orderly 
mannerMost institutions have 
started multi-year 
programmes in 
response, looking at 
this as a joint 
challenge across 
strategy, business 
and risk
Industry observations
Sustainability was mentioned in 
passing during our 2018 survey. Three years on, the world has 
changed as the generational 
challenge of climate change has transitioned into the mainstream
The Paris accord has led many 
governments to articulate ambitious targets and develop long-term strategies on how to achieve them. On the regulatory front, Europe has 
emerged as something of a frontrunner 
with the Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA) and subsequently the European Central Bank (ECB) publishing 
comprehensive expectations for 
the financial services industry that extend beyond external disclosure. Regulation is beginning to emerge in other parts of the world with the Monetary Authority of Singapore(MAS), for example, recently publishing their expectations.
Climate change and the broader 
topic of sustainability present a range of significant challenges for financial services
First of all, there is the sheer complexity of how these matters will play out over the coming decades. Transformational change will require the capacity to 
form a consensus on key policies 
such as carbon pricing mechanisms. While such arrangements have been emerging on a regional or local-scale, 
it will take drawn-out negotiations 
to transition to global solutions. Secondly, it is not the case that one size fits all, as countries have very different characteristics and are hence starting from different positions. This means that while the transition to 
electric mobility might actually take 
place in some Western countries within the next decade, there are significant infrastructure bottlenecks in emerging markets that will require major funding 
to be overcome. Thirdly, there is huge 
uncertainty as to how actors will behave in such a system, even with regard to who the actors will be to begin with as well as the impact that 
their actions might have.3   Preparing for climate change
18  Risk Management 2025 and beyondWhile the TCFD report issued in 
2017 provided a framework on how to look at transition and physical 
risks and how to frame disclosure, 
regulation is emerging only gradually
There is a consensus that industry 
practices will emerge over the coming 
years with regulators observing what 
banks are doing and adapting their expectations based on best practices. With regard to how institutions are framing their response to sustainability, we noted several trends:•	Sustainability is seen as a strategic 
theme rather than as a risk itself – 
an outlook that is also reflected in regulatory guidelines. However, some institutions have consciously opted to elevate it to the status of a principal risk as this gives it the focus that they feel it deserves.
•	Regulators view the Risk function as the first point of contact within an institution; however, many institutions feel that while the Risk 
function should be prominently 
involved, it should not be primarily accountable.
•	While figuring out the right form of governance and the framing 
of institutions’ responses remain 
current challenges, there is a broad consensus that this needs to be approached by bringing together strategy, business and risk.
•	Most institutions indicate that they have an ESG policy in place. However, responses to the questionnaire indicate that there has been no industry-wide convergence 
concerning policy ownership to date.
“Combining carbon 
pricing and ESG 
regulation with the low 
interest rate environment 
risks shifting the world 
into an anti-growth state” 
(CRO, APAC-based 
bank)ESG policy ownership – First vs. second line of defense
2nd line owned 
15 (62.5%)1st line owned  
9 (37.5%)Number of institutions
ESG policy owner – Corporate title
Number of institutions
Head of Sustainability
CRO
Head of ERM
Head of Operational risk/
Head of Non-financial risk
Business
Head of Regulatory 
Affairs
Head of Wholesale credit24
15
4
11
It is clear that firms will have to 
develop capabilities for formulating an informed strategy and establish 
effective and compliant risk 
management practices; nevertheless, it is not believed that the transition is expected to unfold in a disorderly manner
With the post-pandemic situation 
taken into consideration, several institutions have expressed the view that governments and central banks will be highly reluctant to take any action that could impact an economic 
recovery and/or damage the fabric of 
society, which is already viewed as fragile in many countries. Amongst other factors, it is anticipated that emissions pricing is unlikely to get to a level where it will really bite until the mid to late 2030s or that it may even 
not be emissions pricing but changes 
in society that will shape the transition. 
Nonetheless, there is also recognition 
of the need to build robust qualitative 
and quantitative scenario analysis capabilities in order to assess potential impacts if such expectations prove wrong and earlier action brings about a less gradual transition with more painful impacts in some sectors and 
countries.
Most institutions have started 
multi-year programmes in response to climate change and view this as 
a joint challenge encompassing 
strategy, business and risk
No uniform approach has emerged 
here but some institutions have had 
success in identifying key trends, 
topics and events and in using these to work out where key vulnerabilities are located within their business and organisation, including those that might only materialise over the 
longer term. Physical risks can draw 
upon an extensive body of literature and established methodologies, in particular in the area of insurers and reinsurers where capabilities in 
this regard underpin their business 
model. However, there is still much for banks to do in defining and building up the necessary capabilities to support modelling and disclosure requirements. Some institutions are investing in building in-house capabilities, while others 
are considering drawing on external 
offerings to identify and understand where physical risks may have an impact on their clients or operations.
A key challenge of transition risks is 
the difficulty of framing the transition and understanding the complexities of how things will play out across the globe. While institutions such 
as the International Energy Agency 
(IEA) and the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) have developed various climate pathways and related scenarios that provide useful anchoring points, these require 
expansion, in particular for scenarios 
focused on shorter-term time horizons. Data is often not publicly accessible to the extent that it needs to be. This is an area that is seen as requiring further 
regulatory guidance and potentially 
some industry solutions.
Blueprint for change
1.   Embed sustainability within the enterprise risk management framework and risk appetite  
Sustainability is a thematic trend rather than a risk. 
Institutions have taken different choices when assigning 
ownership and positioning it within their risk taxonomies. However, the starting point here is to understand how sustainability impacts the institution and its operating environment across different time frames and to 
determine the respective strategy. This means defining 
the principles that will ultimately shape how sustainability influences the enterprise risk management framework and risk appetite.
2.   Augment tools and capabilities to identify and assess physical and transition risks as part of risk identification  
Climate change is such a complex and multifaceted 
topic that the question of where to start arises. New 
tools and capabilities are required to identify and assess its impacts and to figure out how to integrate new requirements into business and risk processes. Embedding a catalogue of well-defined accelerated 
transition and event-based scenarios is emerging as
transition and event-based scenarios is emerging as 
a powerful tool for this purpose.
3.   Expand stress testing and scenario analysis capabilities to incorporate climate scenarios and 
related analysis and reporting requirements  
The particularly long-term time horizons and varying 
risk drivers here will necessitate the development of novel features; however, these will not replace but rather complement existing stress testing capabilities. Data is 
seen as a key challenge and the view held here is that 
regulatory standards will be required in various areas to ensure consistency in the information requested from other parties or provided by data firms.
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  19
20  Risk Management 2025 and beyond4   Building on the lessons from Covid-19 – never let a crisis go to waste
Risk functions played a key role in sourcing data and insights to meet heightened management and regulatory demands. 
Looking forward there are a number of learnings from the crisis which we expect to shape scenario design and frequency, change delivery and data driven decision making. For example, none of the stress scenarios designed and run by banks had prepared them for the level of contagion we saw unfold during CoVID19. Similarly the decisive actions by central banks and governments should help shape future expectations on the role of government and regulation.Industry observationsThe Covid 19 pandemic was the 
manifestation of a scenario that was 
severe yet implausible; outside the 
realm of what is considered realistic 
enough to be taken seriously as part of 
scenario design, until it happenedDespite the challenges of, in some 
cases, tens of thousands of staff 
across the value chain moving to 
remote working, all institutions were 
able to maintain operations without 
major incidentsThe financial impact of the crisis was 
significantly muted by government 
interventions globally with clear 
consequences for future expectations 
around interaction between 
governments, financial institutions and 
the broader society
1.   Review and where required refine risk framework and appetite to effectively monitor risks arising from large parts of the organisation continuing to work partially from home
2.   Recast business continuity and other contingency plans around what would drive a resilience to financial and operational points of failure
3.   Fundamentally restructure how scenarios are designed and used. Future scenrios need to include agent-based approaches, drive broader participation and challenge across the organisation (and beyond it) and create awareness of strengths and vulnerabilities
4.   Build on learnings from the crisis when designing future risk reports and analyticsBlueprint for change
5.   Invest in faster and more dynamic enterprise-wide stress testing capabilities
Industry observations
The Covid-19 pandemic was the 
manifestation of a scenario that was 
viewed as severe yet implausible 
and beyond the realm of what was sufficiently realistic to be seriously considered as part of scenario design – until it happened
Most institutions included a pandemic 
in their catalogue of stress scenarios. However, these were generally modelled around a SARS-type event 
and thus limited in terms of their 
geographical impact and the time frame of their duration. Not a single institution had considered either the 
global reach and impacts of social 
distancing over such a long period of time or the much broader implications of a crisis that was not financial in origin. This continued to be the case 
even when there were growing signs of 
a global pandemic in early 2020.
Despite the challenges of, in some 
cases, tens of thousands of staff 
across the value chain moving to remote working, all institutions were able to maintain operations without major incidentsThis has been the first large-scale test of operational resilience across 
the financial services industry and 
many stakeholders would not have expected the ability of even complex global institutions to transition to a remote and digital way of operating 
within such a short time frame. In 
some cases, this transition included using partial on-site models, while other institutions were actually able to 
transition smoothly to remote working 
arrangements within just one week’s notice.
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  21Adapting to the crisis did not take 
place without challenges and participants across the industry spoke 
of an intense two or three-month 
period at the outset where the focus was on health and safety, supporting customers and sorting out technology and equipment to ensure operational 
continuity. 
•	Staff and customer health and safety were a clear priority across the industry. While many institutions 
were able to quickly move to remote 
working arrangements, this was not possible in all areas – at least not immediately. 
•	Technology and access to 
equipment was an early area 
of focus. Many institutions had 
significantly invested in their remote 
working and collaboration platforms in earlier years and this paid off during the pandemic by enabling 
a smooth transition in most areas. 
Other institutions spoke of initial challenges relating to bandwidth and secure remote connectivity capabilities but highlighted 
outstanding performances by their 
IT functions in quickly bringing such capabilities online. 
•	Customer contact centres were often not equipped to transition 
immediately to remote working 
due to a shortage of equipment such as laptops and, in some cases, outdated telephony systems that posed structural 
challenges. As such, concepts 
for on-site arrangements were an immediate priority, including those for maintaining social distancing, 
staggered working times as well 
as protocols regarding cleanliness 
and making personal protective 
equipment available. •	Offshore locations and third parties were found to not always have robust contingency plans in place and faced 
impediments such as deficiencies in 
telecommunications networks or a lack of Internet at home. Furthermore, some institutions spoke of the need to provide equipment such as laptops 
to third party staff as this was critical 
to operational continuity. Some had to develop local contingency arrangements for areas such as 
collections to ensure the ability to 
service customers on a timely basis.
•	There was a need to rapidly improve analytics and build new digital platforms to gather client data as 
well as scripts to auto-process 
applications to the greatest extent 
possible. Supporting customers 
in distress and administering government programmes/applying moratoria proved to be a 
significant operational challenge that 
required processes and systems to be reoriented or designed and implemented within a short space of time.
•	In addition, many firms spent significant resources on building transaction-level analytics for their retail and SME customers as well as on detailed analysis and monitoring 
of larger corporate customers. This 
information was used to identify various issues such as deteriorating financial situations or vulnerabilities and to proactively reach out to 
customers rather than waiting for 
the collections or restructuring processes to kick in. Some banks recognised that the crisis highlighted 
their organisations’ ability to drive 
large scale change within very 
tight time frames and in a dynamic 
environment.The financial impact of the crisis was significantly muted by government 
interventions around the world 
with clear consequences for future expectations about interactions between governments, financial 
institutions and broader society
The extreme levels of volatility took 
risk and provisioning models into uncharted territory and there was a need for significant overlays. Most banks expected a significant shock to financial markets with the 
initial dislocation plunging markets 
downwards as Western economies began moving into lockdown. While this did not ultimately translate into losses, some of the early market dislocations will continue to have 
resonance in future stress scenarios.
Most banks saw government 
intervention as critical and necessary – a key lesson from the 
2008 crisis. Such intervention was
resonance in future stress scenarios.
Most banks saw government 
intervention as critical and necessary – a key lesson from the 
2008 crisis. Such intervention was 
not only credited with the short-term stabilisation of the market, but also with preserving the fabric of society during times of turmoil and widespread 
disinformation. Governments and 
regulators showed that they had learnt from the experience a decade ago and were still acutely aware of the potentially disastrous economic and 
social consequences that a crisis of 
this magnitude could unleash. There is a consensus that the swift action taken in Q1 2020 helped to stabilize 
the markets by preventing sustained 
market ruptures like those experienced during the 2008 crisis.
Blueprint for change
1.   Review and – where required – refine risk framework 
and appetite to effectively monitor risks that arise due to large parts of the organisation continuing to 
work partially from home  
After the first year of the pandemic, the “new normal” 
and what it means for ways of working is at the top of many institutions’ minds. The success story of the initial transition to working remotely has caused many 
organisations to think about accelerating or increasing 
plans for reducing occupational density. Furthermore, some are still pursuing this goal as a strategic objective. Nevertheless, with the passing of time, firms have become increasingly aware of the negative impacts of remote working arrangements, as these have been taking their toll on staff and amplifying specific risks.  There are institutions that are now seeking a large-
scale return to the office as soon as is feasible but 
the consensus is that some level of remote working is likely to stay with us and will require the rethinking of leadership and collaboration models. This will mean revisiting risk appetite and control mechanisms, in 
particular those relating to how confidential information 
is managed in a potentially non-secure environment.
2.   Recast business continuity and other contingency 
plans based on what bolsters resilience against 
financial and operational points of failure  
Most institutions had designed their business continuity planning around recovery centres that required physical proximity. This did not work in the pandemic and 
required institutions to think quickly on their feet. While 
there was therefore some questioning of the actual value of these plans, some institutions felt that their plans came in useful because, although they featured elements that had not been developed with a particular 
situation in mind, they nevertheless highlighted key 
elements that needed to function irrespective of the crisis situation. Governance mechanisms, the flow of information and communication strategy were highlighted as key elements that institutions had to get 
right. A lesson learned across the industry was the need 
to extend business continuity planning to the institutions’ ecosystems because third-party suppliers (and their 
respective suppliers) exhibited vulnerabilities during 
the pandemic that had significant implications for the institutions themselves.3.   Fundamentally restructure how scenarios are designed and used – future scenarios need to include agent-based approaches, drive broader 
participation and critical thinking across the 
organisation (and beyond it) and raise awareness of strengths and vulnerabilities  
The human mind struggles with outlier events such as the pandemic and these are often dismissed as “so 
implausible that it just will not happen”. Current tools 
are largely focused on analysing “severe, but plausible” events but with very limited time allocated to scenario design or the identification of key vulnerabilities. In most cases, the primary scenarios are largely financial/economic in terms of their origin and the analytical framework is geared towards dealing with historical correlations and the economic drivers of models. The crisis has highlighted the need for scenario design and 
analysis to play a much broader role in highlighting 
and promoting organisational scrutiny around a wider range of operational, business and balance sheet vulnerabilities.
4.   Build on lessons learned from the crisis when designing future risk reports and analytics  
Managing the pandemic and fulfilling information requests from internal and external stakeholders 
required diverse sets of data to be produced at a much 
higher frequency. Looking forward, opportunities exist for better accessing, organising and using the data that institutions hold. Questions have also arisen about the standard reporting that was provided because 
parts of it were not viewed as useful during the crisis
parts of it were not viewed as useful during the crisis 
and lacked key points of information that were seen as equally valuable for normal times. In particular, many organisations spoke about making much better use of transaction-level data, for example for identifying at-risk 
customers and for formulating outreach strategies.
5.   Invest in faster and more dynamic enterprise-wide 
stress testing capabilities  The crisis showed limitations in the architecture of 
stress testing and in abilities to assess various different 
scenarios in crisis situations (when quick turnaround cycles are essential). The need to create a better link 
between capital and liquidity and to enhance abilities to 
ascertain the impact of a given scenario across multiple risk types were also recurring themes here.
22  Risk Management 2025 and beyond
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  235  Preparing for the decade of operational resilience
As growing numbers of risks prove too hard to anticipate, resilience is likely to become a core tool for senior 
management to deliver on their risk management obligations. Bank frameworks are still at an early stage of integrating resilience into scenario analysis as well as overall outcomes which Risk functions track. There is also a need to continue to build and embed risk insights in business decisions, including leveraging new data sources.Industry observationsOperational resilience is 
emerging as the other key 
trend (next to sustainability) 
that will require continued 
focus over the next ten 
yearsBanks see the need to build 
a deeper and forward 
looking understanding of 
operational vulnerabilities 
more or less at par with 
financial resilienceSimilar to sustainability, 
operational resilience is not 
seen as primarily Risk-
owned, although Risk will 
be playing a key roleThere are material linkages 
with third party risk 
especially in the context of 
the impact of outsourced 
operations on resilience
1.   Getting the basics right – establishing a common understanding and thinking materiality-based
2.  Look beyond the boundaries of the institution when assessing resilience
3.   Develop rigour around the calibration and use of appetite and tolerances
4.  Review “move to cloud” initiatives through the lens of operational resilienceBlueprint for change
Industry observations
Operational resilience is emerging 
as the second key trend (next to sustainability) that will require 
continued focus over the next ten 
years
Similarly to sustainability, this topic 
was more marginal in 2018 and 
has now transitioned to the top of the agenda. UK regulators were frontrunners here in terms of setting expectations and communicating with 
institutions over the past 3–4 years. 
Other regulators are now increasingly following suit with key regulators focusing on where “concentrations” 
are broadly located in terms of points of failure. In Europe, related standards 
already existed regarding cyber and information security as well as outsourcing and the focus is now shifting toward operational resilience due to experiences from the pandemic in combination with the publication of standards by the BCBS.
Main challenges in building a resilient organisation
Business model, 
organization  and IT  
15 (32.6%)Other  
5 (10.9%)
Awareness and common 
understanding  
8 (17.4%)Governance, frameworks and 
risk management practices  
6 (13.0%)
Business continuity planning  
7 (15.2%)Visibility of processes, systems and relationships  
4 (8.7%)Scenario analysis and analytics  
1 (2.2%)Number of mentions
24  Risk Management 2025 and beyondWhile practices relating to this topic 
are more established than in the case of sustainability, weaving the 
different strands together nonetheless 
remains a work-in-progress. The key challenges described include:•	Building awareness and a common understanding of the concept 
of operational resilience across 
institutions and how it relates to existing practices
•	Thinking end-to-end along value 
streams/customer journeys and, 
where relevant, looking outside the organisation at third parties including service providers and industry utilities
•	Developing sustainable capabilities 
for identifying and understanding 
where key vulnerabilities are located as well as what to measure and how to set tolerances around the key metrics identified
•	Investing in the right expertise in both the first and the second line of defence so that the individuals entrusted with tasks and oversight have a deep understanding of what 
the real issues are, how to measure 
them and how to make the right cost/benefit choices in shaping the target state control environmentAn interesting point of view expressed in numerous conversations around sustainability and operational 
resilience is the need for industry 
standards and potentially for industry-wide utilities. An example highlighted by several participants was joint audit/control models for cloud providers.
Banks view the need to build 
a deeper and forward-looking understanding of operational 
vulnerabilities as more or less equal 
to the need for financial resilience
Business continuity planning has been 
a requirement and good practice for a 
long time and expectations regarding cyber and information security as well 
as third party management have been increasing over the last five years. 
However, the concept of operational 
resilience is now taking these issues to the next level and weaving together various risk topics. Building a resilient organisation is seen as requiring a 
much better understanding of the 
points of failure that it is exposed to and these may be located both within and outside the organisation. Many 
institutions are at the beginning of 
their journey, investing in the creation of much greater transparency around processes, systems and third-party relationships and identifying which are 
the most critical among them.
Key current focus areas in building a resilient organisation
Awareness and common 
understanding  3 (6.1%)
Governance, frameworks and 
risk management practices  
14 (28.6%)Other  
3 (6.1%)
Business continuity planning  
9 (18.4%)Visibility of processes, systems and relationships  7 (14.3%)
Business model, organization and IT  
8 (16.3%)Scenario analysis and analytics  
5 (10.2%)
Similarly to sustainability, operational 
resilience is not seen as primarily owned by Risk functions, although 
Risk functions have a key role to play
For most respondents, the overall 
framework is owned and maintained by the Risk function. However, the 
first line is entrusted with coordinating 
and implementing the requirements. Second line teams are starting to emerge within Risk functions but these are still relatively small. Key focus areas here include education, process mapping and the use of scenarios to 
identify key vulnerabilities as well as 
investing in better and more resilient infrastructure. The Cloud has emerged as an area of focus across the industry due to the potential new points of failure as well as the need to develop effective control and assurance mechanisms.There are links of material significance with third party risk, especially with regard to the impact of outsourced 
operations on resilience
The pandemic was seen as high  lighting 
the importance of offshore operations 
and third parties for operational 
resilience due to instances of operational 
disruptions and material breaches of standards at some institutions. It is important not only to consider each third party in and of itself, but also each third party’s ecosystem and exposure to disruptions that could compromise 
its ability to operate. This is seen as an 
area of increasing focus for regulators and concern has been raised by some banks that expectations may be raised to a standard where the economics of offshoring and outsourcing arrangements may no longer be viable.
Blueprint for change
1.   Getting the basics right – establishing a common understanding and thinking on the basis of materiality  
A potential key challenge in this area is a lack of 
awareness about operational resilience and its 
connection to established practices relating to business continuity planning, cyber and information security and third-party management.   
Strong governance, clear accountability and consistent 
definitions are essential in order to push ahead with efficient programmes for building a resilient organisation. For example, a common understanding of what “critical” 
actually means for services, systems and data items 
is important for focusing on what really matters when identifying potential points of failure and developing response capabilities. 
2.   Look beyond the boundaries of the institution when assessing resilience  
Operational resilience requires institutions to think beyond their own boundaries. Institutions spoke of a need to operate outside of risk appetite in their dealings 
with third parties during the pandemic (e.g. departing 
from the status quo position of “no appetite for remote working”) as well as incidents such as data breaches and a lack of access to adequate equipment that posed challenges to business continuity. In addition, there is 
a growing awareness of other points of failure that are 
beyond the control of the institution, such as a central counterparty (CCP) falling over or a prolonged Internet or 
power grid outage. A key area of focus here is mapping 
out value streams and identifying critical areas that could impact operational continuity, including those which may lie outside the institution itself. Doing so will require developing a toolkit that includes stress testing, 
structured scenarios and process simulations.
3.   Develop rigour around the calibration and use of 
appetite and tolerances  
It is hard to define risk appetite in relation to operational 
resilience because this topic encompasses several risks 
that are thematic in and of themselves. The development of metrics is a work-in-progress. Points of interest here include the need to consider incidents such as systems 
outages on a dynamic basis due, for example, to the 
different impacts of a critical system outage during normal business hours compared to night-time.
4.   Review “Move to Cloud” initiatives through the lens
different impacts of a critical system outage during normal business hours compared to night-time.
4.   Review “Move to Cloud” initiatives through the lens 
of operational resilience  
While looked at as a strategic priority in terms of building resilience, agility and reducing cost, the Cloud also poses new challenges. Given the asymmetry of negotiating power between the big Cloud providers and 
financial services institutions, industry standards will 
have to be defined and this may require regulatory or governmental action.“The biggest risk to  
operational resilient is not our 
bank – I am very comfortable 
with our practices. However, 
I am much more worried about 
the practices of our service 
and infrastructure providers. 
What would happen if a cyber -
security incident takes a central 
counterparty offline?”  
(Risk COO, US-based  
bank)
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  25
26  Risk Management 2025 and beyond6  Seizing upon the advent of true automation
There has been considerable investment in building self-service analytics platforms and making these available to staff 
across the institution with an aim to provide more effective capabilities and potentially reduce cost at the same time. Compared to our survey in 2018, we also note significant progress in the advanced analytics space, with new tools and models having gone into production across the risk management lifecycle. However, realising the potential of emerging technologies at scale still faces a number of challenges, in particular legacy infrastructure and data quality as well as 
governance and demand management.Industry observationsMany firms see big data and AI/
machine learning at a must-win battle 
to remain competitive. In particular, 
there is a limit on how far the cost 
of risk and compliance can be 
reduced without much more use of 
advanced analyticsMuch adoption is being driven 
organically within institutions where 
large analytics and data science 
teams  are beginning to emerge within 
Risk functions and are driving the 
data and tooling agendaBanks are exploring at scale 
application of AI/ML in a wide range of 
risk topics going beyond the initial 
focus largely around Compliance and 
financial crime
1.   Set up a technology vision and integrated roadmap aligned with other parts of the organisation and underpinned by strong 
governance and demand management
2.  Augment staff by providing better toolkit and analytics capabilities
3.   Articulate and follow through on data related foundational enhancements; set up a clear and actionable ethics policyBlueprint for change
Industry observations
Many firms see big data and AI/
machine learning as a must-win struggle to remain competitive, 
especially in light of the limits on 
how much the cost of risk and compliance can be reduced without using advanced analytics
The adoption of advanced analytics 
had already started in 2018 with many institutions highlighting that computing power and data availability/accessibility 
had arrived at a stage where it was 
possible to enjoy real benefits from deploying these technologies. However, a feeling existed that Risk functions 
were lagging behind the other parts of 
the firm and had not been sufficiently integrated into the broader initiatives in this area.Three years on, there are signs of an accelerating adoption in the 
Risk and Compliance space. While 
not every institution has made the same progress, everyone is at least thinking about and experimenting with applications. And some institutions 
have made remarkable progress, 
which was evident from the examples provided and the level of depth at which our interview partners spoke about 
their initiatives. While there were some 
contrarian views expressed on the transformational potential, and some institutions explained deliberately not aiming to be leaders in this space, the 
overall ambition is to deploy AI and ML 
at an increasing scale.
Risk function perspectives on the relative importance of emerging technologies
AI and machine learning
Digital identity and 
digital twins
Distributed ledger 
technology
Internet of things 31%45%85%
59%Weighted score based on ranking of technologies
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  27Much adoption is being driven 
organically within institutions where large analytics and data science 
teams are beginning to emerge 
within Risk functions and are driving the data and tooling agenda
Some institutions have made 
significant progress in the area of data 
governance and are putting central data stores and automated data feeds in place. Many institutions spoke of using third-party solutions in this space and some have gone so far as to acquire equity stakes in promising 
start-ups. Others have further 
entered into partnerships with leading technology firms for uses relating to horizon scanning and developing early warning systems.
A number of obstacles still remain, 
including a need for improvements 
in the management of returns on investment, legacy systems and access to/availability of high-quality data. 
Clarifying accountabilities and aligning 
interests across different functions and areas of the institution remains a challenge. Participants highlighted several areas under consideration with 
a view to enhancing governance and 
demand management mechanisms:•	Positioning the right individuals within executive management to give appropriate prominence to data and 
advanced analytics
•	Revisiting how budgets are allocated 
and managed across different areas as well as increasing the rigour in relation to business cases and 
tracking the delivery of expected 
benefitsBanks are exploring at-scale applications of AI/ML for a wide range of risk topics and going 
beyond the initial focus area of 
Compliance and financial crime
Compliance and financial crime 
were the areas in which most 
institutions were using some form 
of AI/ML-based tools (including both in-house developments and third-party solutions). This is seen as transformational in this area as it enhances effectiveness and efficiency while simultaneously being well 
received by regulators. Most banks 
highlighted that their areas of focus were expanding throughout the institution and that priorities included credit risk, operational risks and regulatory/internal reporting.
Focus areas where AI and ML-based models have been successfully deployed 
into production
Customer support and 
chatbots18
Financial crime 12
Customer segmentation 10
Credit decisioning 9
Data quality 6
Other 9Number of mentionsThe increasing availability of data 
as well as capabilities to segment individuals much more effectively 
and combine novel data sets that are 
used for targeting and understanding risk profiles are bringing the need to establish strong ethical foundations into the limelight. We note that this 
is at the top of institutions’ minds, 
even among those operating across a number of jurisdictions with different standards around privacy/data 
protection. It is expected that this topic 
will gain further prominence as privacy and data ownership continue to be a growing concern in society.
Blueprint for change
1.   Establish a technological vision and integrated 
roadmap that is aligned with other parts of the organisation and underpinned by strong governance 
and demand management  
Data and analytics have been successfully deployed 
for many risk types and across many areas of activity. However, not everything can or should be done at once. There is a need to emphasise return on investment both 
in the selection of any solutions being developed and 
after they go live. In addition, governance and the way in which budgets are structured were seen as an area that requires additional attention.
2.   Augment staff by providing a better toolkit and analytics capabilities  
Building “smart” tools such as "interactive FAQ-systems/chatbots" and the prototyping of digital risk assistants (see section on non-financial risks) are priority areas of investment for larger firms and those with international 
operations seeking to develop effective, efficient and 
future-proof capabilities.3.   Articulate and follow through on data-related foundational improvements and set up a clear and actionable ethics policy  
Significant investment has gone into addressing the challenges of legacy architectures and data quality. There is an increasing awareness that these factors will be critical for remaining competitive. Because more data about individuals is being used, ethics and privacy 
are increasingly coming to the fore and some view 
strong privacy regulation as an advantage rather than a drawback.
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  297  Managing the generational workforce transition
Industry observations
Institutions are reappraising the 
skill sets of risk management professionals as they reposition 
their Risk functions and explore 
new organisational structures and ways of working
The participants highlighted the 
following core principles for the design of their target state:•	Risks should be managed where they are taken with operational 
activities being moved to the first line 
wherever possible
•	Risk needs to focus on material vulnerabilities, especially where there 
is a conflict of interest between risk 
taking and risk oversightAs institutions become increasingly digital and automated, this changes the risk profile and the ways of working. While 
“traditional” financial risks will still remain relevant, the way in which they are managed will evolve with the expectation of increased use of technology and materially smaller teams. On the other hand, there is agreement that staff with a very different background will be required to deal with some of the emerging new risks, with particular focus on affinity for data and technology as well as diverse specialisms.Industry observationsInstitutions are reappraising the skill 
sets of risk management professionals 
as they reposition their Risk functions 
and explore new organisational 
structures and ways of workingThe transition will not happen 
overnight and is expected to take 
place more gradually over timeThe incoming generation has grown 
up with technology and is looked at 
as inherently tech-affine, bringing 
skills and attitude to tech enabled 
problem solving that institutions 
are looking to build
1.   Setup plan and mechanisms to manage the generational transition
2.  Build a balanced team with the right behavioural and specialist skills
3.   Develop a data-driven strategic workforce management frameworkBlueprint for change
•	Risk functions should be involved in 
decision-making at an early stage rather than just overseeing them and 
challenging outcomes once incidents 
have already taken place
•	Risk should be allowed sufficient time to consider what could happen and should apply a philosophy of 
hedging/preparation in order to 
prevent unwelcome surprises
While these principles may not 
necessarily sound new, conversations 
with a wide range of institutions across the industry have shown that it is still hard to apply them in practice and the thinking here is still evolving. There is 
a consensus that this will require the 
development of more holistic thinking, risk awareness and accountability across the organisation as well as support from the right incentives. 
Establishing a strong risk culture is seen as pivotal to delivering these goals 
and there is a general recognition of the challenge this poses in times when 
everyone is chasing returns, costs are 
being cut and extensive changes are taking place. Many participants linked this closely to their ideas regarding the Risk professional of the future, 
explaining that in the course of instilling 
more holistic and thematic thinking within institutions, they are consciously trying to promote this type of culture 
and skills mix within Risk functions. 
While the growing need for specialist skill sets was similarly highlighted as important, having Risk professionals who are able to work constructively 
with heads of business departments 
on initiatives, such as setting up a new legal entity in a particular jurisdiction or assisting with the launch of a new customer-facing app, was seen as a 
critical thing to get right.
The transition will not happen 
overnight and is expected to take place more gradually over time
Existing staff will need to be supported 
during upcoming times of significant change as ways of working evolve and become more technology enabled. This outlook applies not only 
to the second line but to the entire 
organisation because achieving the target state of a specialised, agile and more senior second line function will require the development of maturity 
and holistic thinking that extends into 
the first line as well. This has led many institutions to invest significantly in upskilling and the development of self-service platforms with risk and 
compliance modules available to their 
first lines of defence.
The incoming generation has grown 
up with technology and is looked at 
as inherently tech-affine, bringing skills and attitude to tech enabled problem solving that institutions are looking to build
It is also believed that leadership 
models and career pathways will have to evolve to cater to the differing expectations of millennials. While this view was more prominently expressed among European institutions, there 
was a general sense of the growing 
importance of work-life balance and a lower readiness to undergo geographical (including in-country) 
relocation in return for promising 
opportunities. Furthermore, career journeys may need to be structured such that they include positions in multiple parts of the firm in order to 
foster the holistic mentality that firms 
have singled out as a critical capability that they are seeking to develop.
Blueprint for change
1.   Set up a plan and arrangements to manage the generational transition  
The digital transformation of institutions is seen as 
requiring tools and new arrangements to support 
existing staff. At the same time, institutions must remain attractive to future talent, which means rethinking career journeys and ways of working.
2.   Build a balanced team with the right behavioural and specialist skills  
There is broad consensus on the need for balanced teams. While there were no uniform views regarding the 
skills of the envisaged risk professional of the future, 
there was a strong emphasis on individual skills such as holistic thinking, storytelling and digital affinity as well as on the importance of emphasising a balanced mix of personalities throughout the team.3.   Develop a data-driven framework for strategic workforce management  
We found that some institutions have developed 
workforce management frameworks that bring together 
planning, change initiatives and data relating to the Risk function headcount and skills. However, responses to the questionnaire indicate that data on skill sets is not tracked or immediately available in many institutions and 
that clear targets have not been set. We believe there is 
a need for improvement in this area and that this will be critical for facilitating the successful transformation of Risk functions over the next decade.“Current approaches 
to talent development 
and promotion lead to 
too many individuals with 
a limited breadth of risk 
and business experiences 
taking senior roles in 
the Risk function”  
(CRO, EU-based  
bank)
30  Risk Management 2025 and beyond
Risk Management 2025 and beyond  31
Study Development 
and Coordination
Ajay Raina
Director, PwC UKajay.raina@pwc.com
Johannes GöldnerSenior Manager, PwC Germanyjohannes.goldner@pwc.com
About us
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in 155 countries with over 284,000 people whoare committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
Contacts
Europe
Dr. Sami Khiari
GermanyTel: +49 30 26361453
sami.khiari@pwc.com
Dr. Michael Rönnberg
GermanyTel: +49 69 95851524
michael.roennberg@pwc.com
Gregory Joos
Belgium
Tel: +32 2 7109605
gregory.joos@pwc.com
Rami Feghali
France
Tel: +33 1 56577127
rami.feghali@pwc.com
Anthony Kruizinga
Netherlands
Tel: +31 61 3087637
anthony.kruizinga@pwc.com
Casper Ruizendaal
Netherlands
Tel: +31 88 7927538
casper.ruizendaal@pwc.com
Symon Dawson
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 7483 422850symon.k.dawson@pwc.com
Ajay Raina
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 7714 153427ajay.raina@pwc.comJukka Paunonen
Finland
Tel: +358 20 7877715jukka.paunonen@pwc.com
North America
Dietmar SerbeeUnited StatesTel: +1 917 902638
dietmar.d.serbee@pwc.com
Pranjal Shukla
United StatesTel: +1 203 8092522pranjal.m.shukla@pwc.com
Jonathan Riva
CanadaTel: +1 416 8155069jonathan.riva@pwc.com
Michael Auret
CanadaTel: +1 416 6878676michael.auret@pwc.com
APAC
Edwina StarAustraliaTel: +61 2 82664940 x64940
edwina.star@pwc.com
Justin Waller
AustraliaTel: +61 2 82660181 x6018
justin.waller@pwc.comSam Shuttleworth
New ZealandTel: +64 21 976949sam.shuttleworth@pwc.com
Tamara McDonagh
New ZealandTel: +64 22 0199636tamara.x.mcdonagh@pwc.com
Yoshiteru Ito
JapanTel: +81 80 13472227yoshiteru.ito@pwc.com
Jun Muranaga
JapanTel: +81 80 13472227jun.muranaga@pwc.com
Africa
Jacques MullerAfricaTel: +27 11 2870609
jacques.muller@pwc.com
Kumar Tulsi
AfricaTel: +27 11 2870361
kumar.tulsi@pwc.com
© 2021 PwC. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity.
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.This content is for general information purposes only, and should not be used as a substitute for 
consultation with professional advisers.
www.pwc.de